# MIT 600.1x part 1 notes

### Useful links

[Single Step thru your code watching the variables change with python tutor](http://pythontutor.com/)
 [Understanding finger exercises - fexes](https://courses.edx.org/courses/course-v1:MITx+6.00.1x+2T2019/discussion/forum/course/threads/5cf8368b0dafc6099100236d)
 [The grader and how to post code on the discussion board](https://courses.edx.org/courses/course-v1:MITx+6.00.1x+2T2019/discussion/forum/course/threads/5cf83756d8eab109760023df)
 [Check the difference between your answer & the graders](https://www.diffchecker.com/)
 [Listcomps Rock (IMHO)](http://treyhunner.com/2015/12/python-list-comprehensions-now-in-color/)
 [Python 3 Cheat Sheet](https://perso.limsi.fr/pointal/_media/python:cours:mementopython3-english.pdf)
 [CTA's Short Tutorials](https://courses.edx.org/courses/course-v1:MITx+6.00.1x+2T2019/discussion/forum/course/threads/5cfa606e0dafc6098e002424)

### imperative vs declarative knowledge

- Declarative knowledge - statements of fact, truth.
  - e.g. 'square root of number x is y, such that y * y = x'
  - doesn't tell how to work it out.
- Imperative tells us how to work something out.

- algorithm components
  - a sequence of steps
  - flow of control
  - method to determine when to stop

Computer's program counter points to the next instruction in the program.
The computer executes the instructions mostly in a linear sequence, except sometimes it jumps to a different place in the sequence. correct


Any legal expression in a programming language, any computation, has associated with it a value.

### language aspects
- elements
  - primitives
  - means of combination
  - means of abstraction

1.  syntax - parsing - is it legal?
  e.g. 'cat dog boy' is not syntactically valid English.

2. Static semantics - Determines whether a string has meaning
   e.g. 3 + 'hi'   syntactically correct

3. Full semantics - Assigns a meaning to a legal statement.
   Failure can be the most difficult source of bugs,
  e.g. 'horse ate me' when you mean 'I ate a horse'

  - in English, semantics can be ambiguous
  - programming semantics are not ambiguous

### Data objects

#### scalars
- can't be subdivided.
- Distinguishes a single value like an integer or float from a data structure like an array
- Examples:
  - ints
  - floats
  - bool
  - NoneType - has only one value, None

- non-scalars - can't be subdivided

syntax for express

- operator precedence
  - ** exponentiation
  - *  multiplication
  - /  division
  - +  add
  - -  subtract

# Operator return types
  i+j   sum         => float if i or j are floats
  i-j   difference  => float if i or j are floats
  i*j   product     => float if i or j are floats
  i/j   division    => float if i or j are floats
  i//j  integer division => float
  i%j   quotient of j
  i**j  i to the power of j

#### strings
- string concatentation
  - uses '+'
  - an exampkle of **overloading**
- non-scalar - elements can be extracted from them.

#### string indexing

- example - indexing string mystr='foobars'

operation     | returns   | meaning / notes
------------- | -------   | ------------------------------------------
mystr         | 'foobars' | the original string
mystr[:]      | 'foobars' | returns a copy, not the original
mystr[1:3]    | 'oo'      | from index 1 'o' to index 3 'o'
mystr[1:]     | 'oobars'  | from index 1 to end
mystr[3:]     | 'bars'    | index 3 to end
mystr[:1]     | 'f'       | up to index 1, i.e. index 0
mystr[:3]     | 'foo'     | up to index 3, i.e. 0-2 inclusive
mystr[-1]     | 's'       | the last element
mystr[-3]     | 'a'       | the third last element
mystr[:-1]    | 'foobar'  | start to 1st from the end
mystr[:-3]    | 'foob'    | start to 3rd from the end
mystr[-2:]    | 'rs'      | from 2nd last to end


#### index stride

- stride is the third parameter
- defaults to 1, so that every character between two index numbers is retrieved.
- refers to how many characters to go forward after first character is retrieved from string. e.g.


    ss = "Sammy Shark!"

operation  | returns        | meaning / notes
---------- | -------        | ------------------------------------------
ss[6:11:1] | 'Shark'        | stride=1, returns the same as the first
ss[6:11:2] | 'Sak'          | stride=2, returns each 2nd char in range
ss[0:12:2] | 'SmySak'       | stride=2, return every 2nd char, from index[1]
ss[::4]    | 'Sya'          | stride=2, return every 4th char
ss[1::2]   | 'am hr!'       | stride=2, return every 2nd char, from index[1]
ss[::-1]   | '!krahS ymmaS' | stride=-1, return string reversed
ss[8:5:-1] | 'ahS'          | stride=-1, chars from index[8-5]] reversed

### Use a slice function as an index


    >>> str1 = "Hello, World!"
    >>> s = slice (1,4,2)
    >>> str1[s]
    'el'

#### input / output

- **for** versus **while** loops

loop type      |for                 | while
:-----------   |:-----------        |:--------------------------------------------------------------
No. iterations | jnow # iterations  | unbounded no. of iterations
early exit     | using break        | using break
uses counter?  | yes, uses          | Optional, counter is initialized outside, incremented inside loop
Can be swapped?| yes, with while    | a for loop may not work


### Guess and Check

    number = input("supply a value")
    myguess = 0

    while myguess  ** 3  < number:
        myguess += 1
    if myguess ** 3 != number:
        print (f"{number} is not in fact a cube root")
    else:
        print (f"The cube root of {number} is {myguess}")

### representation of real numbers


- Every number is internally represented as binary by the Computer.

#### integers - decimal to binary


    x = 19
    x = 10011
    x = 1 * 2^4 + 0 * 2^3 + 0 * 2^2 + 1 * 2^1 + 1 * 2^0

- So conversion from decimal to binary can use strategy:
- see example 'int_to_binary.py'

    while num > 0:
        result = str(num % 2) + result
        num = num // 2


#### floats - decimal to binary

Example - 3/8  can be written as:

    = 0.375
    = 3 x 10^-1 + 7 x 10^-2 + 5 x 10^-3

1.  Multiply by a power of two that will convert to a whole number.
    For this example, 8 will do it:

    0.375 * (2**3) = 3 (d ecimal)
2.  Convert 3 to binary (11)
3.  Divide by the same number - (2**3),
    This can be done by shjift right -
    Right shift '11' by 3 bits gives '.011'


- Implications
  - if there is no integer p such that x*(2**p) is a whole number, the representation will be an approximation.
  - testing the equality of floats is not exact
  - use abs(x-y) < (some small number) to be confident numbers are near equal.

Another example:

    1/4 = 0.25

Times 2² will give a whole number:

      = 0.25 x 2² / 4

    Right shift 2 places:
      = 1
      = .01   (binary)

    3/16

Times 2⁴ gives a whole number

    3
In binary then shift right 4 bits

    11

### Newton - Raphson
A general approximation algorithm for finding roots of a polynomial.

If g (guess) is an approximation to the root, then a better approximation can be found by taking:

    g - p(g) / p'(g)

Explanation - from g, subtract (polynomial p(g) divided by the derivative of p(g))

p'(g) means derivative

Take a simple case  - cx² + k
First derivative    - 2cx


So if polynomial is:  x² + k, then the derivative is 2x

Newton-Raphson says that for a given guess 'g', a better guess is:

    g = (x² - k) / 2g

This can be implemented in a loop:



    y = 24            # what we want sqrt of
    epsilon = 0.01    # how close an acceptable answer should be
    guess = y / 2.0   # our starting point
    numGuesses = 0

    while abs (guess ** 2) > epsilon:
        numGuesses += 1
        guess = (guess ** 2)  - (2 *g)
        g = (x² - k) / 2g

    print ("I guess ", str(guess), " this took ", str(numGuesses), " guesses.")


## Abstraction and Decomposition

- Achieve abstraction with docstring or function definition.
- Don't need to know implementation, only the interface.

### Functions
- Provide a means of abstraction.
- Functions are not run until called or invoked.
- Function characteristics:
  - name
  - parameters
  - docstring (optional) tells what the function does
  - body



### Passing parameters to a Function

1. Refer to the example function:

    def printName(firstName, lastName, reverse):
        if reverse:
            print(lastName, firstName)
        else:
            print(firstName, lastName)

Valid methods to call the function include:
- passing the arguments with name=value


    printName('eric', 'grimson', True)
    printName(firstName='grimson', firstName='eric, reverse=True )


### Default parameter values for function

Default values can be specified:

    def printName(firstName, lastName, reverse = True):
        ... omitted

'reverse' parameter has been given default value of 'True'.
'reverse' parameter doesn't need to be supplied, unless you want to override it.


### Receive a list or dictionary as parameter

e.g. receiving a dictionary of key/value pairs as arguments to our function:

    '''
    def ssh_keywordargs(**kwargs) -> None:

        func_args = kwargs.items()
        for key, value in func_args:
            print(f"key is {key}, value is {value}")
    '''

### passing a list or dictionary as parameter

NB: the use of SINGLE `*` to dereference list members:

    print("passing a list of args to the function:")
    args_list = ["9.9.9.9", "damien", "cisco", "luger"]
    my_func(*args_list)

NB: the use of TWO `**` to dereference list members:

    print("passing a dictionary to our function, NB need two stars to derefernce dict:")
    fcn_args = ["9.9.9.9", "damien", "cisco", "luger"]
    args_dictionary = {"username": "damien", "ip_addr": "9.9.9.9", "password": "cisco"}
    my_func(**args_dictionary)

### Function docstring

Defines the contract for the function.

    def is_even(i):
        """
        input: (int) i
        output: (bool) True if i is even; False if i is odd
        """
        return i % 2 == 0


### Recursion

- Recursive function calls itself.
- We avoid an infinite loop by creating a base case.
- Each recursive call creates its own scope.

### Inductive Reasoning

To prove a statement indexed on integers is true for all values of n:

- prove it is true for the smallest value of n (e.g. n=0, n=1)
- then prove it is true for an arbitrary value of n; one can show it is must be true for n+1


    Sum integers 0 .. n = n(n+1)/2
    n = 0
    0 =  0(0+1)/2 = 0
    1 =  1(1+1)/2 = 1
    2 =  2(2+1)/2 = 3


### Tuples

- Immutable type.
- Need to add ',' to indicate a tuple, e.g.


    t = ('one')     # string
    t = ('one',)    # tuple

- uses for tuples:
  - atomically swap two variables
  - return more than one value from a function.


    def swap(x, y):
        (x, y) = (y, x)
        return (x, y)


### Common operations for strings, tuples, ranges, lists

    seq[i]          # indexing
    len(seq)        # length of sequence
    seq1 + seq2     # concatenation - except for ranges
    n * seq         # repetition
    seq[start:end]  # slice sequence


### Dictionaries
- store pairs of data
- key :: value
- no order to the keys or values (vs. list, which is ordered)

- keys must be unique
- key must be hashable
- need care with float as a key, watch for rounding
- values can be of **any** type
- values can be duplicates

**Safe access to dictionary values:**
Acess a value is my_dict['a'], where 'a' is the key we want to find.
However, if the key is NOT in the dictionary; we get a KeyError.
To avoid this, we can use the call

    my_dict.get('a',0)

This is the "safe" way to access a value if we are not sure the key is in the dictionary.

`d.get(key,default)` returns the value for key if key is in the dictionary d, else default.
If default is not given, it returns None, so that this method never raises a KeyError.
Example:


    >>> hand['e']
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    KeyError: 'e'
    >>> hand.get('e', 0)
    0

Nice way to safely populate dictionary 'freq':


    freq = {}
    for x in sequence:
        freq[x] = freq.get(x, 0) + 1
    return freq

**Copying dictionaries**
.copy() method for dictionaries:
https://docs.python.org/3/glossary.html#term-iterable

### Lists
- an ordered collection of data
- list index can be a value or an expression
- similar to tuples:
  - square brackets [] not round ()
  - but only lists are **mutable**
- mutability also gives possibility of mistakes

- All these list operations will mutate the original list:

    list1.extend(list2)   # list2 will be appended
    list1.sort()          # list1 will be sorted
    list1.pop()           # returns last list element, removes from list1
    list1.remove(4)       # removes first instance of the specified entry from list
    list1.reverse()       # reverse the order of l1



- other list operations

    list(my_string) will return my_string as a list


#### list comprehension

List comprehension is a way of transforming a list from one form to another.
Example:

    my_list = [1,2,3,4,5]
    new_list = [ x**2 for x in my_list]

#### lambda functions

Lambda are one line disposable functions.
e.g. you might want a function that will square numbers:

    def squarenum(x):
        return x**2


Alternatively, you could define a lambda, and assign to the variable 'f' as follows:

    f = x: x**2
    
Now we can use this like a function:

    f(10)   (will return 100)


### sorting - sort() vs sorted()

- calling sort() mutates the original list

    list1.sort()          # sort list1 in place, no return value

- calling sorted() does not mutate the original list
- must assign the result to a variable

    sorted(list1)         # return a sorted version as a list


### range

- range is special procedure
- range is something that behaves like a tuple:


    range(5) <> tuple (0, 1, 2, 3, 4)

- all elements are not generated immediately.
- elements will be generated sequentially.


### Mutation, Aliasing and Cloning

- Lists are mutable.
- Multiple variables may point to the same list.

    >>> warm = ['orange', 'yellow', 'red']
    >>> hot = warm
    >>> warm is hot
    True

Alternatively, a hot a **clone** of warm:

    >>> hot = warm[:]
    >>> warm is hot
    False


### map() function
- a general purpose HOP (Higher Order Procedure)
- returns an iterable, that needs to be walked down


1. Simple form - a unary function and a collection of arguments

    for elt in map(abs, [1, -2, 3, -4]):
        print(elt)

2. General form - an n-ary function and n collections of arguments

    l1 = [2,9,5]
    l2 = [3,7,8]
    for elt in map(min, l1, l2):
        print(elt)

### generator

A type of function that can send back a value; then come back and resume from where it left off.
i.e. can generate a sequence of values over time.
The syntax difference with normal functions is the use of **yield** keyword.


## Exceptions


### python exception handling strategy


      try:
          # this part will run first
          <code>
      except:
          # runs if an exception occurs in the try block
          # more than one Exception clause can be defined
          <code>
      else:
          # Excecutes if the try block 'succeeds', i.e. there was no exception
          <code>
      finally:
          # will *always* execute
          <code>


## Classes

- Class methods are functions with scope limited to the class.
- The difference vs. functions is that they allow you to pass data (shared state) in clode
- reference class data with 'self.' prefix


### Define the class


    class Coordinate(object):
        def __init__(self, x, y):     # first paramater 'self' is mandatory
            self.x = x
            self.y = y

### define getters and setters

Define these explicitly to avoid direct manipulation of the object data.

## Program Efficiency

A working solution can be implemented in different ways.
However there are only a handful of different algorithms.
Even with fast computers, some solutions may not scale.

### Measuring efficiency - the issues

e.g. Memoization - precomputing a lot of values may be convenient and simple, at the cost of storing those values.
We need to separate the concerns in the tradeoff of time vs. space.

### appraoch - measure time
Measure using the time module:


    import time

    def c_to_f(c):
        return c*9/5 + 32

    t0 = time.clock()
    c_to_f(10000)_
    t1 = time.clock() - t0
    print("t = ", t, ":", t1, "s,")

Problems with the time measurement approach:
- varies between computers
- varies with algorithms
- not predictable based on small inputs


### Approach - measure operations

Instead of measuring time, measure the number of primitive operations inherent in each solution.

This will vary by size of the input.
It is not obvious **what** to count.

### Third approach

- Timing and counting evaluate implementations.
- Need to choose the input to use to evaluate a function.
- There may be multiple parameters to a function, e.g.:

    search_for_element(e, L)

- may be value, e.g. an integer
- may be the length of a list - list_sum(L)

### Case analysis
Best case for search function is when the element is first in the list.

- best case - minimum run time
- average case - on average
- worst case - the most useful, over all inputs

Orders of growth
Need to evaluate efficiency for very large inputs.
- constant - time does not change with input
- Linear - time grows in direct relation to input.
- logarithmic - time reflects the log of the input
- quadratic - a steepening curve of time over input
- n log n - more than linear, not as bad as quadratic
- exponential - expensive for larger input


## generator type

- Have already seen this idea with range.
- range is essentially a generator, provides first value with a promise to return the rest of the sequence.
- generators have a next method associated with them
- they will yield a value, then suspend execution until next invocation.
- this is a simple generator, returning 1 then 2
- subsequent invocations return 'StopIteration' to indicate no more values to return


    def genFoo():

        yield 1
        yield 2
    >>> foo = genFoo.genFoo()
    >>> foo.__next__()
        1
    >>> foo.__next__()
        2
    >>> foo.__next__()
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    StopIteration                             Traceback (most recent call last)
    <ipython-input-6-5d994c17f9ca> in <module>

### Indirection  
Indirection (also called dereferencing) is the ability to reference something using name, reference, or container instead of the value itself.
The most common form of indirection is the act of manipulating a value through its memory address.

## python debugger

Basic python debugger is pdb.  
To begin, import pdb.  
If you set a break point, execution will halt and drop you into the debugger there. 

### ways to invoke pdb

1. Import pdb in code:

    import pdb
    # complicated code with bugs
    pdb.set_trace()
    
    
2. In Python 3.7+, there is no need to import pdb.  

Call `breakpoint()` at the point you want to drop into the debugger:

    # complicated code with bugs
    breakpoint()

3.  Invoke at runtime:

    python -m pdb my_function.py

Will wait at the entry point to the program.  


### use pdb

Show the current postion in the code in context:

    list .
    list 1,20     # list only lines in 1-20

Step through the program:

    s(tep)  # execute current line, stop at the first possible occasion (either in a function that is called or in the current function)
    n(ext)  # continue to next line in the current function is reached or it returns

Step vs. next: 
- step will descend into the function,
- next will step to the line in the next highest context

    c(ont)  # continue, only stop at a breakpoint

Show arguments:
    args


Change / modify arguments - e.g. change the variable 'password':

    !password = "cisco"


Print a variable:

    p ip_addr


Pretty-pring a variable:
    pp ip_addr


Up / down the call stack

    up            # go up the call stack to inspect
    down          # go down the call stack to inspect

Show type of an object with `whatis`:

    (Pdb) whatis username
    <class 'str'>

